Odds and Ends
===

Details related to symmetric encryption not covered in the previous chapters

#### Key Derivation Functions (KDFs)

* We need multiple keys - a MAC key, and encryption key etc.
* To generate more keys given a uniform source key SK, we feed it to a PRF F in this manner:
* KDF(SK, CTX, L) = F(SK, (CTX || 0)) || F(SK, (CTX || 1)) || ... || F(SK, (CTX || L))
* CTX is a variable that uniquely identifies the application. Even if multiple applications on a system sample the same source key, they will end up with different expanded keys.

**Problem**: PRFs are only pseudo random if the input k is uniform in K. The source key might not be uniform if

* Key exchange protocol was used. Such a key might be uniform in a subset of K
* A hardware RNG was used and it might produce biased output

**Solution**: Extract-then-Expand paradigm.

* A pseudo-random key is derived from the source key.
* An extractor takes an input that may not be uniform and generates an output that is uniform (or indistinguishable from uniform) over the key space.
* The extractor uses a salt - a fixed, non-secret string chosen at random
* Expand k as before

**Examples**

* HKDF - HMAC based KDF. Uses k <- HMAC(salt, SK) // HMAC(key, data). Then expand using HMAC as PRF with key k. This is a good method, as long as SK has sufficient entropy.
* PBKDF - Password based KDF. Passwords have insufficient entropy, so HKDF is unsuitable. If HKDF is used, the derived key will be vulnerable to dictionary attacks. PBKDF uses salt and a slow hash function H<sup>(c)</sup>, ie, H run c times. In PKCS#5 (aka PBKDF1) k <- H<sup>(c)</sup>(pwd || salt)

---

#### Deterministic Encryption

An encryption system that will always map the given message to the same ciphertext. Such a system can be used for lookups in to encrypted databases. To store (index, value) in a database, (E(k<sub>1</sub>, index), E(k<sub>2</sub>, value)) is sent to the database. To retrieve the data, a query with key E(k<sub>1</sub>, index) is sent. The database has no knowledge of what data is being stored within.

**Security issues**:

1. Deterministic encryption cannot be chosen plaintext attack (CPA) secure
2. If the message space is small (say 256), its possible for the attacker to build a dictionary between messages and ciphertexts
3. Even if the attacker cannot decrypt messages, he can find out all the (encrypted) values corresponding to an index

Expanding on point 1, the attacker needs to differentiate between the ciphertexts of two messages m<sub>0</sub> and m<sub>1</sub> to "win" the CPA game. Guide to winning:

1. Submit a pair of messages that are equal - (m<sub>0</sub>, m<sub>0</sub>). Hence find out c<sub>0</sub>
2. Submit a pair of messages (m<sub>0</sub>, m<sub>1</sub>).
3. The returned ciphertext is either c<sub>0</sub> or c<sub>1</sub>. Its easy to tell which, and so the attacker wins every time, ie, with Advantage = 1

**Solution**: Never encrypt the same message twice. The pair (k, m) never repeats. Either one/both of the pair change between encryptions. This happens when

1. Chooses messages at random from a large message space (say, random 128-bit messages)
2. Message structure ensures uniqueness. For example, the message includes the unique user ID and every user has only one entry in the database.

Based on this we define Deterministic CPA security. In the Deterministic CPA game, the attacker submits q pairs (m<sub>i,0</sub>, m<sub>i,1</sub>) and always gets the ciphertext corresponding to either the left messages (b=0) or the right messages (b=1). The caveat now is that the attacker has to submit distinct messages - m<sub>1,0</sub>, ... m<sub>q,0</sub> are distinct and m<sub>1,1</sub>, ... m<sub>q,1</sub> are also distinct.

Adv<sub>dCPA</sub>[A, E] = |Pr[EXP(0)=1] - Pr[EXP(1)=1]| is negligible

**A common mistake** - using CBC with a fixed IV when deterministic CPA should be used. It is not secure. Using CTR with fixed IV is also insecure because CTR functions like a one-time pad, but with a fixed IV we would be reusing the pad for multiple messages.



---

#### Deterministic Encryption Scheme 1 - Synthetic IVs (SIVs)

Let (E, D) be a CPA-secure encryption. E(k, m; r) -> c. A cipher that doesn't use nonces has to be randomized somehow to be CPA-secure. r denotes the randomness. It comes from this PRF F: K x M -> R (r ∈ R)

E<sub>det</sub>((k<sub>1</sub>, k<sub>2</sub>), m) involves 3 steps

1. r <- F(k<sub>1</sub>, m)
2. c <- E(k<sub>2</sub>, m; r)
3. Output c

**Theorem 1**: E<sub>det</sub> is semantically secure under deterministic CPA. Intuition of the proof - Since r is indistinguishable from random strings, and output of E depends on r, E is semantically secure.

**Features**:

1. This is well suited for messages longer than one block.
2. Ensures ciphertext integrity - decrypt the ciphertext with the prepended IV. Use the plaintext to generate the IV once more. To check integrity, see if the prepended IV matches the derived IV

**Theorem 2**: If F is a secure PRF and CTR from F<sub>CTR</sub> is CPA-secure then SIV-CTR from F, F<sub>CTR</sub> provides Deterministic Authenticated Encryption (DAE). Intuition of the proof:

* The attacker has q ciphertext-plaintext pairs and has to generate a valid ciphertext.
* Even if he does, it is unlikely that the message will correspond to the IV he has prepended.
* If it is a valid IV, then it must be one of the plaintexts from the q pairs, which means the corresponding ciphertext also lies in the q pairs (since this scheme is deterministic).
* The attacker failed to come up with a new valid ciphertext

---

#### Deterministic Encryption Scheme 2 - Pseudo Random Permutation (PRP)

Used for messages shorter than 16 bytes.

Let (E, D) be a secure PRP. E: K x X -> X

**Theorem**: (E, D) is semantically secure under deterministic CPA. Intuition of the proof -

* Let f: X -> X be a truly random invertible function. Since the PRP is secure, it is indistinguishable from f.
* In Experiment(0) the adversary sees f(m<sub>1,0</sub>), ..., f(m<sub>q,0</sub>). Since q is random, the attacker sees q distinct, random values.
* In Experiment(1) the adversary sees f(m<sub>1,1</sub>), ..., f(m<sub>q,1</sub>). Since q is random, the attacker sees q distinct, random values. This is identical and indistinguishable from the results of EXP(0)
* Since he can't do it with a truly random function, he can't do it with a PRP

So a good deterministic encryption scheme is AES.

To construct a PRP-based deterministic encryption scheme for long inputs (a wide block PRP):

1. Let (E,D) be a secure PRP. E: K x {0,1}<sup>n</sup> -> {0,1}<sup>n</sup>. We need to construct a PRP on {0,1}<sup>N</sup> where N >> n
2. We take 2 keys (k, L).
3. We break the message into blocks and XOR each one with a padding function P(L, i) where i is the index of the block. Each result is encrypted to yield PPP<sub>i</sub>
4. All PPP<sub>i</sub> are XOR-ed together to yield MP. MP is encrypted to yield MC.
5. All PPP<sub>i</sub> are XOR-ed individually with P(M, i) to yield CCC<sub>i</sub>
6. Each CCC<sub>i</sub> is encrypted then XOR-ed with P(L, i) to yield output block y</sub>i</sub>

This scheme is called EME and it involves 2 encryptions. Hence for performance reasons it is recommended for short messages while SIV is preferred for longer messages. EME is CPA secure, but doesn't provide integrity. We make one change to achieve integrity. We append n 0s to the plaintext and expect that many 0s after decryption. The chances of the attacker breaking integrity and constructing a valid ciphertext *with* n 0s in the plaintext is 1/2<sup>n</sup> which is negligible.

---

#### Tweakable Encryption

Consider Disk Encryption. It has the following properties

1. Sectors on disk are fixed (eg. 4kb). => The ciphertext of sector has to fit within the same space. => sizeof(m) = sizeof(c). The scheme must be deterministic because there is no space to store the randomness, no space for integrity bits either
2. Lemma - If (E, D) is a deterministic CPA secure cipher with M = C, then (E, D) is a PRP => Every sector will be encrypted with a PRP

Naive encryption scheme - encrypt each sector with PRP(k, .).

* Problem - identical sectors will have identical ciphertexts.
* Solution - use different keys for each sector k<sub>t</sub> = PRF(k, t) where k is the "master-key" and the sector number t = 1, ..., L.
* This is a tweakable block cipher - derive many PRPs from a single key. The "tweak" here is the sector number.
* A tweakable cipher - E, D: K x T x X -> X. For ever t ∈ T and k <- K: E(k, t, .) is an invertible function of X, indistinguishable from random.
* Problem - We aren't storing the derived keys so we would need to apply the PRF for every sector when encrypting/decrypting. That's 2n operations for every n blocks.
* Solution - An XTS tweakable cipher.
  1. Let (E,D) be a secure PRP, E: K x {0,1}<sup>n</sup> -> {0,1}<sup>n</sup>
  2. then XTS: E<sub>tweak</sub>((k<sub>1</sub>, k<sub>2</sub>), (t, i), x) = _
  3. The tweak space is (t, i) where i is the index.
  4. We generate N <- E(k<sub>2</sub>, t)
  5. We XOR the message with result of padding function P(N, i), yielding intermediate **1**. P is multiplication in a finite field, its extremely fast
  6. We encrypt **1** with E(k<sub>1</sub>, .), yielding **2** (thus each block is only encrypted once)
  7. We XOR **2** with P(N, i) to yield the ciphertext

When we apply XTS to disk encryption, each 16-byte block is evaluated with a different tweak (t, i) where i is the block number. Its block level encryption, not sector level but that doesn't matter. Used in OS X, TrueCrypt etc.

---

#### Format preserving encryption

Consider credit cards.

* The first 6 digits is the bin number, which represents the issuer. For example, Mastercard cards start with 51-55.
* The next 9 digits is the account number.
* The last digit is a checksum.
* There are approximately 42 bits of information

Goal: End-to-end encryption. Encrypt the credit card in such a manner that all processing intermediaries think they're interacting with a credit card, while not leaking any critical information to them.

1. Let the set of possible inputs be {0, ..., s-1}. We need a PRP on this set.
2. Let t be such that 2<sup>t-1</sup> < s <= 2<sup>t</sup>. In the case of credit cards t=42.
3. We construct a PRF on 21 bits out of AES by truncating its output
4. We apply the Luby-Rackoff method (Refer notes on block ciphers) to create a PRP on 42 bits out of this. Although 3 is enough to construct the PRP, we will use 7 rounds of Luby-Rackoff to ensure security.
5. While applying the encryption to the input, we might get a ciphertext that doesn't lie in the input set. We keep applying the encryption on the ciphertext until it does. To decrypt, the decryption is applied repeatedly until the plaintext lies in the set. The expected number of iterations is 2.
