Public Key Encryption with Diffie-Hellman
===

#### The Elgamal Public key system

**Review: Diffie-Hellman protocol**

* Fix a cyclic group G (eg. G = ℤ<sub>N</sub><sup>* </sup> or an elliptic curve) of order n
* Fix a generator g in G (ie G = {1, g, g<sup>2</sup>, ..., g<sup>n-1</sup>})
* Alice chooses a random a in {1, ..., n}. Bob chooses a random b in {1, ..., n}
* Alice sends Bob A = g<sup>a</sup>. Bob sends Alice B = g<sup>b</sup>
* Both raise what they have received to the power of the number they chose, yielding a shared secret g<sup>ab</sup>
* Attacker knows ℤ<sub>N</sub><sup>* </sup>, g, A and B, but finding g<sup>ab</sup> from these is thought to be difficult.

**Elgamal system in brief**

* Alice chooses a random a in {1, ..., n}. Bob chooses a random b in {1, ..., n}
* Alice sends Bob A = g<sup>a</sup>. Bob sends Alice B = g<sup>b</sup>. Both of these are considered public keys
* Both raise what they have received to the power of the number they chose, yielding a shared secret g<sup>ab</sup>
* From g<sup>ab</sup> they derive a symmetric key k, with which the encrypt messages

**Elgamal system in detail**

* G: a finite cyclic group of order n
* (E<sub>s</sub>, D<sub>s</sub>): symmetric authenticated encryption defined over (K, M, C)
* H: G<sup>2</sup> -> K a hash function

Using these 3 we define a public key encryption system (Gen, E, D):

* Key generation Gen:
  1. Choose a random generator g in G. g <- {generators of G}  (note: choosing a random generator instead of a fixed one makes it easier to prove security)
  2. a <- ℤ<sub>n</sub>
  3. Output sk = a, pk = (g, h=g<sup>a</sup>)
* Encryption
  1. Bob chooses a random b in {1, ..., n}
  2. u <- g<sup>b</sup>
  3. v <- h<sup>b</sup> = g<sup>ab</sup>
  4. k <- H(u, v)
  5. c <- E<sub>s</sub>(k, m)
  6. Output (u, c)
* Decryption
  1. Alice computes v <- u<sup>a</sup> = g<sup>ab</sup>
  2. k <- H(u, v)
  3. m <- D<sub>s</sub>(k, c)
  4. Output m

**Performance**

Exponentiation takes a few ms on a modern processor. Encryption involves 2 exponentiations - u <- g<sup>b</sup>, v <- h<sup>b</sup> and Decryption involves one v <- u<sup>a</sup>. Encryption is thus twice as slow. However, we can precompute the large tables g<sup>i</sup> and h<sup>i</sup> for i = 1,2,4,8,... which yields a speedup of 3x

---

#### Elgamal security

**Computational Diffie-Hellman assumption**

* Consider a finite cyclic group G of order n.
* Comp. DH (CDH) assumption holds in G if: g<sup>ab</sup> cannot be calculated from g, g<sup>a</sup>, g<sup>b</sup>.
* In other words, for all efficient algorithms A: Pr[A(g, g<sup>a</sup>, g<sup>b</sup>) = g<sup>ab</sup>] < negligible where g <- {generators of G}, a,b <- ℤ<sub>n</sub>

This assumption is not ideal for analysing Elgamal. A stronger assumption is made instead.

**Hash Diffie-Hellman assumption**

* Consider a finite cyclic group G of order n.
* Hash DH (HDH) assumption holds in G if: (g, g<sup>a</sup>, g<sup>b</sup>, H(g<sup>b</sup>, g<sup>ab</sup>)) is computationally indistinguishable from (g, g<sup>a</sup>, g<sup>b</sup>, R) where g <- {generators of G}, a,b <- ℤ<sub>n</sub> and R is a *truly random* key

Why is this a stronger assumption? Consider the contra-positive. Suppose CDH is easy in the group G, then we can prove that HDH is easy in (G, H) ∀ H, |Im(H)| >= 2 (which is true for all practical hash functions). This is because if it was easy to compute g<sup>ab</sup> we can simply compute H(g<sup>b</sup>, g<sup>ab</sup>) and check if the sample is from the hash function or its truly random.

**Semantic security under HDH**

Can the attacker distinguish between (g<sup>b</sup>, E<sub>s</sub>(H(), m<sub>0</sub>)) and (g<sup>b</sup>, E<sub>s</sub>(H(), m<sub>1</sub>))? The output of H() is indistinguishable from a truly random key k. If it weren't, then that would break the Hash Diffie-Hellman assumption. Hence it is impossible to distinguish between the two.

**Interactive Diffie-Hellman assumption**

This is a stronger assumption. The game:

1. The challenger tells the attacker g, g<sup>a</sup>, g<sup>b</sup>
2. The attacker is allowed to submit queries (u<sub>1</sub>, v<sub>1</sub>) ∈ G<sup>2</sup>
3. For each query the challenger responds with 1 if u<sub>1</sub><sup>a</sup> = v<sub>1</sub> and 0 otherwise.

There is no limit on the number of queries.

IDH holds in G if: ∀ efficient A: Pr[A outputs g<sup>ab</sub>] < negligible

This is not an ideal assumption because it involves interactivity.

**Chosen ciphertext security**

Security theorem: If IDH holds in the group G, (E<sub>s</sub>, D<sub>s</sub>) provides authenticated encryption, and H: G<sup>2</sup> -> K is a "random oracle", then Elgamal is CCA secure

Challenge: To prove CCA security using CDH. Options

1. use group G where CDH = IDH (aka bilinear groups constructed from elliptic curves)
2. change the Elgamal system

**Twin Elgamal**

* Key generation Gen:
  1. g <- {generators of G}
  2. a<sub>1</sub>, a<sub>2</sub> <- ℤ<sub>n</sub>
  3. Output sk = (a<sub>1</sub>, a<sub>2</sub>), pk = (g, h<sub>1</sub>=g<sup>a<sub>1</sub></sup>, h<sub>2</sub>=g<sup>a<sub>2</sub></sup>)
* Encryption
  1. Bob chooses a random b in {1, ..., n}
  2. u <- g<sup>b</sup>
  3. k <- H(u, h<sub>1</sub><sup>b</sup>, h<sub>2</sub><sup>b</sup>)
  4. c <- E<sub>s</sub>(k, m)
  5. Output (u, c)
* Decryption
  1. k <- H(u, u<sup>a<sub>1</sub></sup>, u<sup>a<sub>2</sub></sup>)
  2. m <- D<sub>s</sub>(k, c)
  3. Output m

Security theorem: If CDH holds in the group G, (E<sub>s</sub>, D<sub>s</sub>) provides authenticated encryption, and H: G<sup>3</sup> -> K is a "random oracle", then Twin Elgamal is CCA secure

Cost: One more exponentiation on each end.

Can we build CCA-secure Elgamal without random oracles? Research is ongoing.
