Unifying Theme
====

**One way functions**

A function f is one-way if

* There is an efficient algorithm to evaluate f(.) but
* Inverting f is hard. For all efficient A and x <- X: Pr[f(A(f(x))) = f(x)] < negligible
* Say f(x<sub>1</sub>) = f(x<sub>2</sub>) = f(x<sub>3</sub>), given this value, A will not be able to produce any of x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>, x<sub>3</sub>

Proving the existence of one-way functions is the same as proving P != NP

**Example 1: Generic one-way functions**

* Let f: X -> Y be a secure PRG (|Y| >> |X|), eg. f built using det. counter mode
* Lemma: f is a secure PRG => f is one-way
* Proof: Consider the contrapositive. A inverts f. Using A we could build a distinguisher that checks if f(A(y)) = y. For a truly random output y, it would fail and hence the PRG would no longer be secure
* This is not useful for key exchange. The best key exchange possible with this is Merkle puzzles

**Example 2: DLOG**

* Fix a cyclic group G (eg. G = ℤ<sub>N</sub><sup>* </sup> or an elliptic curve) of order n
* Fix a generator g in G (ie G = {1, g, g<sup>2</sup>, ..., g<sup>n-1</sup>})
* Define  f: ℤ<sub>N</sub> -> G as f(x) = g<sup>x</sup> ∈ G
* Lemma: Dlog hard in G => f is one-way
* Important property: f(x), f(y) => f(x+y) = f(x).f(y). This enables public key crypto

**Example 3: RSA**

* Choose random primes p,q ≈ 1024 bits. Set N=p.q
* Choose e,d s.t. e.d = 1 mod 𝜑(N)
* Define f: ℤ<sub>N</sub><sup>* </sup> -> ℤ<sub>N</sub><sup>* </sup> as f(x) = x<sup>e</sup> in  ℤ<sub>N</sub><sup>* </sup>
* Lemma: f is one-way under the RSA assumption. (The assumption is that f is one-way)
* Properties: f(x), f(y) => f(x.y) = f(x).f(y) *and* f has a trapdoor (the trapdoor makes it very easy to make digital signatures)

**Summary**

Public key encryption was made possible by one-way functions with special properties. In particular, the homomorphic property (f(x), f(y) => f(x.y) or f(x+y))
